---
permalink: /u2515h
title:  "Dell UltraSharp U2515H 2560x1440 IPS monitor"
date:   2016-11-15
asin: B01M0LDXTL
price_paid: $325 from Jet.com
---

I feel that the monitor is one component of your PC that should be very high
quality. You could potentially be staring at the screen for hours per day, so
it warrants a good investment. There are hundreds of inexpensive monitors on
the market, but most of them have pretty terrible quality. To get something
good, you're going to have to pay a lot more; but the monitor should have at
least 10 years of productive life, so it's worth it.

I decided that I didn't need a 4k monitor; the difference isn't really
noticeable from a few feet back and many current PCs don't support 4k.

I also knew that I wanted an IPS panel and 2560x1440 resolution. IPS panels
have much better brightness, viewing angles, and color fidelity versus the more
common and less expensive TFT panels. Other must-haves were a good, quality
stand; VESA mount capability; DisplayPort inputs; and USB ports.

I was pretty sure I wanted a 25" monitor. It seems like the perfect sweet spot
for productivity work, between 24" (too small) and 27" (too large). I
eventually plan to add a second identical monitor, which will give a combined
5120x1440 resolution.

The U2515H has really good reviews: [TFT Central](http://www.tftcentral.co.uk/reviews/dell_u2515h.htm).

The U2515H has an excellent 3-year warranty and the "Premium Panel Guarantee"
will replace the monitor if it has a single stuck bright pixel. The U2515H is
one of the only monitors that is factory calibrated for color correctness.

I also own the [BenQ GW2765HT](http://amzn.to/2gdPUgz), which is also an IPS monitor but 27". It is a
nice monitor and a great value, but much less refined than the Dell. For
gaming, it is nice to have the bigger screen though.

Be careful not to get the Dell 24" U2415, which looks similar but is only
1920x1200 resolution.
