---
permalink: /cloud-storage
title: "Google Drive -  Cloud Storage"
date: 2016-09-16
---

There are a lot of cloud storage options today. I have reviewed all of the
options and the Presto's Choice is Google Drive. It has the best overall
balance for all users.

Google Drive at $2/month for up to 100 GB is a great deal. If you buy a
Chromebook, like the Presto's Choice Acer, it may come with 2 years of 100 GB
storage for free.  If you need more storage, 1TB is $10/month. I think these
prices will likely come down over time as well.

Google Drive also allows you to store photos up to 16 megapixels and videos up
to 1080p for free (they don't count against your storage quota). Note that the
photos have to be uploaded via the Google Photos interface and not via Google
Drive. If you upload photos via Google Drive, they will always count against
your quota. Also, Google does change the photos a little bit; most users won't
notice the difference, but if that is important for you, see the recommendation
for Photo Enthusiasts below.

While we are on the topic of photos, Google's online photo editing tools are
simply amazing. You can edit photos, automatically identify faces, search for
themes like "Christmas", and more. People looking to simplify their photo
processing workload should look no further than Google Photos.

One feature that Google Drive has that nobody else has is [file versions](https://support.google.com/docs/answer/2409045?hl=en). File
versioning is very important since it allows you to go back to a period in time
and recover a file's contents at that moment in time. Backup software like the
Presto's Choice [CrashPlan] automatically do that, but most cloud storage
services do not offer this. Note that file versioning is turned off by default
on Google Drive and must be manually enabled.

For photo enthusiasts who have raw files or who don't want Google compressing their pictures, the Presto's Choice would be Dropbox.
