---
permalink: /c200
title: "Toto C200 Washlet"
price_paid: $379 from Amazon
date: 2016-07-01
asin: B00UCIOX2Q
imgur: 1JB2Cto
---

I had my first experience with a Japanese toilet in 2001. It was a life
changing experience. Never before I had questioned the fundamentals of
posterior cleanliness management.

This year, after returning from my most recent trip to Japan, I finally
fulfilled a long-time dream in finally buying a Japanese toilet. Having used it
for several months now, I can’t believe I waited so long to do it.

Installing a Japanese toilet is a very simple procedure. My 3-year-old and
5-year-old boys help me install ours. It took about 15 minutes. The main thing
you will need is an outlet close to your toilet. I installed an outlet myself
pretty easily by running an extension from an existing light switch.
Alternatives would be hiring a contractor to do it (I think the cost would be
$200 or less) or using an extension cord.

I spent many hours compiling a list of all the washlets, as the Japanese toilet
seats are referred to, and comparing the pros and cons of each one.

The must-have features for me originally included: heated seat, heated water,
and an energy-saving feature. Having owned the toilet for a while, I also now
would include: wireless remote control and dryer on the must-have list.

Nice-to-have features for me were: bowl pre-misting and exhaust fan.

One of the rarely talked about aspects of washlets is their energy consumption.
These can add $1 a month to your electric bill, which is wasteful of both money
and natural resources.

Most of the features are self-explanatory, but here are a few additional notes.

The exhaust fan provides charcoal filtering of odors; it works, but it’s loud,
so I turned mine off.

The bowl premisting is a nice feature that sprays water on the toilet bowl when
you sit down, which helps prevent “racing stripes” on the toilet bowl.

Taking all of these factors into account, the Toto C200 was the clear winner.

It has an intelligent energy saving feature that will learn your habits and
automatically power down the washlet when it’s not being used.

Toto is the leader in the washlet industry and has an excellent reputation for
quality and standing behind their product.

The wireless remote is very easy to use and has memory settings for two users.

The cost is quite reasonable for a mid-level washlet. Some models from Costco
and other sources can be about $100 cheaper, but they don’t have the energy
saving feature. The energy saving feature alone can make up for the price
difference over many years.

Size wise, the C200 is middle of the pack. The higher end Totos are much
slimmer, but they are double the price. It doesn’t seem worth the extra money
to me and I quickly adjusted to the size of the C200.

Update: July 2020: The C200 is going strong and I still consider it a great
investment. Couldn't imagine life without it!
